Introduce setting and verifying expectations (#571)
slsa-framework/slsa: docs/spec/v1.0/requirements.md

part of the build to allow the release process to upload it in a manner
prescribed by the package ecosystem.

### Expectations and verification

The package ecosystem is responsible for ensuring expectations are defined, verified before package use, and are only modified by the package's authenticated producer.

> #### Expectations

Author: Yes, great point. I'll add a paragraph here and may even mention this in the terminology page too.

<table>
<tr><th>Requirement<th>Description<th>L1<th>L2<th>L3

<tr id="expectations-known">
<td>Expectations known
<td>

The package ecosystem MUST ensure that expectations are defined for the package before it is made available to package ecosystem users.

> There are several approaches a package ecosystem could take to setting expectations, for example:

Author: Good feedback, thanks. I am trying to say there are several approaches, here are two possibilities. I will remove the use of implicit and explicit.

> There are several approaches a package ecosystem could take to setting expectations, for example:

Author: I've rephrased the examples in the list in 6c7884567ce530e9a4a73e8844f6cbabbdfe248c.

-   explicitly, i.e. when registering a new package in the package ecosystem.
-   implicitly, i.e. by using values from the package's provenance during its initial publication.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓
<tr id="expectations-non-falsifiable">
<td>Expectations non-falsifiable
<td>

> The package ecosystem MUST ensure that expectations are non-falsifiable, that is secure against attacks which would enable use of a package which was:

Author: I was purposefully trying not to be too prescriptive here.

> The package ecosystem MUST ensure that expectations are non-falsifiable, that is secure against attacks which would enable use of a package which was:

Reviewer: LGTM.

> **TODO**: check this list for completeness against threats

-   Built from an unofficial fork of code
-   Built from unofficial branch of tag
-   Built from unofficial build definition
-   Built by an untrusted build system

<td><td>✓<td>✓
</table>

#### Verifying expectations

A critical responsibility of the package ecosystem is to verify that the provenance for a package matches the expectations defined for the package.

> Verifying expectations COULD happen in multiple places within a package ecosystem:

Reviewer 2: Is the list exhaustive? It seems that you could just not capitalize COULD in this case. Each item in the list has its own MUST, SHOULD or MAY that is sufficient.

> Verifying expectations COULD happen in multiple places within a package ecosystem:

Author: Great feedback, thanks both! The list is not exhaustive, it's some example places that expectations can be verified. The only hard requirement is that expectations are verified (where they exist). I will lowercase COULD hear, remove all of the RFC 2119 capitalised keywords from the list, and add a more explicit statement that expectations MUST be verified.

> Verifying expectations COULD happen in multiple places within a package ecosystem:

Reviewer 2: LGTM.

> -   during package upload the registry SHOULD verify that the package's provenance matches any known expectations for the package before accepting the package into the registry.

Author: agreed, I am removing the use of SHOULD here. It was intended to indicate that a package ecosystem might not verify during upload, not that it should accept packages with provenance that doesn't match.

> Expectations SHOULD be set for all packages in a package ecosystem. Where expectations are set, the package ecosystem MUST verify the package's provenance meets the expectations before the package is used. Verifying expectations could happen in multiple places within a package ecosystem, for example by using one or more of the approaches:

Reviewer: Good enough for me.

-   during client-side installation/deployment of a package the package ecosystem client SHOULD verify that the package's provenance matches the ecosystem known expectations for the package before use.
-   package ecosystem participants and/or the ecosystem operators MAY perform continuous monitor of packages to detect changes to packages which do not meet the known expectations.

> The package ecosystem SHOULD default to denying use of packages, only allowing packages if there exists provenance for the package which matches the known expectations.

Author: Yeah, I fully support this pattern and I think the text allows for it implicitly (SHOULD default to deny, not MUST). I'm happy to call it out explicitly, if that's preferred.

> The package ecosystem SHOULD default to denying use of packages, only allowing packages if there exists provenance for the package which matches the known expectations.

Author: I've updated earlier sections in a way that I think makes it clear that the npm approach is fully supported by the spec, do you think we need to add something more explicit?

> The package ecosystem SHOULD default to denying use of packages, only allowing packages if there exists provenance for the package which matches the known expectations.

Reviewer: I think there is confusion over what "default" means, since there are two defaults at play:

- Opt-in vs opt-out on a per-package-name basis: how do you handle packages that have no explicit SLSA configuration? I think that is up to the ecosystem. I'm guessing SLSA would not recommend one vs the other. IIUC this is what Kris was talking about.

- If a package *is* opted in, then effectively the implementation MUST be implemented such that it only considers the package [version?] as meeting a SLSA level if there exists some provenance that meets the expectations. In other words: (1) omitting provenance results in a deny; (2) if there are multiple provenance attestations, the system accepts any combination that satisfy the expectations. I believe that's what this sentence was trying to explain?

> Verification MUST ensure that the `BuildType` and `ExternalParameters` in the provenance match the known expectations. The package ecosystem MAY allow an approved list of `ExternalParameters` to be ignored during verification. Any unrecognised `ExternalParameters` SHOULD cause verification to fail.

Reviewer 2: By the way, I realize  "unrecognized" isn't wrong per se but the rest of the spec uses the American spelling so I think we should be consistent.

> Verification MUST ensure that the `BuildType` and `ExternalParameters` in the provenance match the known expectations. The package ecosystem MAY allow an approved list of `ExternalParameters` to be ignored during verification. Any unrecognised `ExternalParameters` SHOULD cause verification to fail.

Reviewer: Also need to add something about having a pre-configured map from builder ID to SLSA level. OK to leave as a TODO.

> Verification MUST ensure that the `BuildType` and `ExternalParameters` in the provenance match the known expectations. The package ecosystem MAY allow an approved list of `ExternalParameters` to be ignored during verification. Any unrecognised `ExternalParameters` SHOULD cause verification to fail.

Author: Absolutely right, I try to stick to en_US when working on SLSA but failed here. Thanks for catching it.

part of the build to allow the release process to upload it in a manner
prescribed by the package ecosystem.

### Setting Expectations

<dfn>Expectations</dfn> MUST cover all listed
[build integrity threats](threats#build-integrity-threats) up to the desired

> SLSA level.

Author: This definitely felt lacking, thanks for the suggestions. I've expanded this a bit to include them and also added a TODO to link to more concrete guidance.

It is important to note that  expectations are tied to a <dfn>package</dfn>

> name, whereas provenance is tied to an <dfn>artifact</dfn>. Package ecosystem's

Author: Done

    publication (trust on first use).

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓
<tr id="expectations-changes-auth">
<td>Changes authorized
<td>

The package ecosystem MUST ensure that any changes to expectations are
authorized by the package's producer. This is to prevent a malicious actor
from updating the expectations to allow building and publishing from a fork
under the actor's control. Some ways this could be achieved include:

-   Requiring two authorized individuals from the package producer to approve
    the change.
-   Requiring consumers to approve changes, in a similar fashion to how SSH
    host fingerprint changes must be approved by users.
-   Disallowing changes altogether, for example by binding the package name to
    the source repository.

<td><td>✓<td>✓
</table>

### Verifying expectations for artifacts

It is a critical responsibility of the package ecosystem to verify that the
provenance for a package matches the expectations defined for that package.

A package version is considered to meet a given SLSA level if and only if the
package ecosystem has verified its provenance against the package's
expectations. If expectations are defined for a package but no provenance

> exists for the artifact, this should result in verification failure.

Author: Agree, this is a MUST for verification. Updated the text.

Conversely, if multiple provenance attestations exist, the system SHOULD accept
any combination that satisifes expectations.

Verifying expectations could happen in multiple places within a package
ecosystem, for example by using one or more of the following approaches:

-   During package upload the registry ensures that the package's provenance
    matches any known expectations for that package before accepting it into
    the registry.
-   During client-side installation/deployment of a package the package
    ecosystem client ensures that the package's provenance matches the
    any known expectations for that package before use.
-   Package ecosystem participants and/or the ecosystem operators perform
    continuous monitoring of packages to detect any changes to packages which

>     do not match the known expectations. **TODO:** shoul we expand to emphase

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    do not match the known expectations. **TODO:** should we expand to emphasize
```

Author: well, that's embarrassing. thanks for catching.

>     emphasize that the value of monitoring without enforcement is lower?

Author: Thank you!

> All package ecosystem verifiers will require a pre-configured map from

Reviewer 3: In this context does "pre-configured" mean "configured prior to verification"? If so, maybe we should make that explicit.  Or maybe it's simpler to drop "pre-configured" and say "require a mapping".

Author: I agree that it's simpler to drop, I will do so.

> All package ecosystem verifiers will require a mapping from `builder` `id` to

Author: Apologies, I had intended to tidy that up before submitting. I've changed to "builder identity" so that we're not relying on the recommended provenance format too much in our requirements.

the SLSA level the builder is trusted to meet. How this map is defined,
distributed, and updated is package ecosystem specific.
> **TODO:** expand on this map model. Provide examples for ecosystems to follow,
perhaps in the use-cases, and link to certification.

> Verification MUST ensure that the `builder` `id` is one of those in the map of

Author: Great suggestions, done.

> trusted builder id's to SLSA level, and that the `BuildType` and

Reviewer 3: Should we also require that the provenance's level is one of levels the builder ID is trusted to produce?

Author: Do you mean to explicitly require that a verifier ensures that the provenance meets provenance [generation requirements](https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/requirements#provenance-generation) and that the provenance includes the fields required to satisfy the stated level in the mapping?

`ExternalParameters` values in the provenance match the known expectations. The
package ecosystem MAY allow an approved list of `ExternalParameters` to be
ignored during verification. Any unrecognized `ExternalParameters` SHOULD cause
verification to fail.

> NOTE: The term <dfn>package ecosystem</dfn> may be interpreted loosely. For

Author: Done.

example, one could implement a system which is external to the canonical
package ecosystem and perform SLSA verification for that package ecosystem's
contents. This combination can be considered a package ecosystem for the
purposes of setting and verifying expectations.

> 

Author: Agreed. TODO added to the list.

> **TODO:** Update the requirements to provide guidelines for how to implement,

Author: Done.
